##### Project: Urban Adaptive Clines (UAC)
##### Manuscript: Predicting the strength of urban-rural clines in a Mendelian polymorphism along a latitudinal gradient
##### Authors: James S. Santangelo, Ken A. Thompson, Beata Cohan, Jibran Syed, Rob W. Ness, and Marc T. J. Johnson

This project has been accepted at Evolution Letters

Code and data for this project are additionally available on [Dryad](https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.5061/dryad.4j0zpc87k)

### Abstract

Cities are emerging as models for addressing the fundamental question of
whether populations evolve in parallel to similar environments. Here, we
examine the environmental factors that drive the evolution of parallel
urban-rural clines in a Mendelian trait—the cyanogenic antiherbivore defense
of white clover (*Trifolium repens*). Previous work suggested urban-rural
gradients in frost and snow depth could drive the evolution of reduced
hydrogen cyanide (HCN) frequencies in urban populations. Here, we sampled over
700 urban and rural clover populations across 16 cities along a latitudinal
transect in eastern North America. In each population, we quantified changes
in the frequency of genotypes that produce HCN, and in a subset of the cities
we estimated the frequency of the alleles at the two genes (*CYP79D15* and *Li*
) that epistatically interact to produce HCN. We then tested the hypothesis
that cold climatic conditions are necessary for the evolution of cyanogenesis
clines by comparing the strength of clines among cities located along a
latitudinal gradient of winter temperatures and frost exposure. Overall, half
of the cities exhibited urban-rural clines in the frequency of HCN, whereby
urban populations evolved lower HCN frequencies. Clines did not evolve in
cities with the lowest temperatures and greatest snowfall, supporting the
hypothesis that snow buffers plants against winter frost and constrains the
formation of clines. By contrast, the strongest clines occurred in the warmest
cities where snow and frost are rare, suggesting that alternative selective
agents are maintaining clines in warmer cities. Some clines were driven by
evolution at only *CYP79D15*, consistent with stronger and more consistent
selection on this locus than on Li. Together, our results demonstrate that
urban environments often select for similar phenotypes, but different
selective agents and targets underlie the evolutionary response in different
cities.

### Using the code in this repository

To use the code in this repository to reproduce the manuscript's results, please
follow the following steps:

1. `git clone` this repository or download it as a
zip folder
2. Open `Rstudio`, go to `file > Open project` and open the
`UAC.Rproj` Rproject associated with this repository
3. Once open, type `packrat::restore()` in the **R console** to download the
packages required to perform the analyses. If packrat doesn't work (it's a
little finicky), manually download the packages listed at the top of
[scripts/main.R](scripts/main.R) and use you current version of R.
4. Manuscript results can be reproducibly generated by
running [scripts/main.R](scripts/main.R), which will additionally created the
directories that store cleaned/processed dataframes, tables, figures, and key
results.

